JUDY WOODRUFF: But first:
Schools are paying a lot more
attention to what students post
online, and that can have
severe consequences for
students and schools.
Harvard University
withdrew the admittance
of at least 10 incoming
freshmen who had reportedly
posted violent, racist and
sexually explicit content
in a private Facebook group.
High schools are cracking down,
too, with some hiring outside
companies to police social
media posts.
But monitoring online behavior
is difficult, and civil
rights groups are watching.
Special correspondent Lisa
Stark with our partner Education
Week visited a school district
in Arizona.
LISA STARK: It's just before
summer break at Dysart High
School in Surprise, Arizona,
outside Phoenix.
Students are eating lunch,
signing yearbooks, and they're
immersed in social media.
Facebook, Twitter, Snapchat,
Instagram, YouTube.
More than 90 percent of teens
say they go online every
day, and nearly a quarter are
online almost constantly.
Let me ask you, first of
all, do you all have phones?
STUDENT: Yes.
STUDENT: Yes, we do.
LISA STARK: Do you ever
not have a phone with you?
STUDENT: No.
STUDENT: It's always on.
LISA STARK: We sat down with
four Dysart students to talk
about how they use social media.
Snapchat, I post every single
day, like, every day, all day.
STUDENT: I always
like post my thoughts,
certain way I'm feeling.
Depends on how I'm
feeling that day.
STUDENT: When I'm done with all
my work, and if I don't have
any work from other classes,
I just go on my phone
and see what's going on.
STUDENT: I don't really
care who sees it.
Like, I'm just posting it
because I think it's public.
Like, I'm open about it.
LISA STARK: The problem for
schools, what happens on social
media doesn't always stay
on social media.
STUDENT: I see a lot of
bullying on Facebook that
it transfers to the school.
And then, like, at the beginning
of this year, this girl got
into an altercation on Facebook,
and she ended up fighting
the girl at school.
AMY HARTJEN, Principal, Dysart
High School: When something's
posted on social media and
it's being talked about
on campus and it disrupts
learning, that's when
we have to step in and
decide if there's something
that we need to react to.
LISA STARK: Nationwide, a
growing number of districts are
watching what's posted online
for anything that might
impact their schools.
Principal Amy Hartjen says the
number one concern is safety.
What's like, OK, we have
to get involved here?
Bullying, would
that be a red line?
AMY HARTJEN: Absolutely,
threats, intimidations.
LISA STARK: What if
someone posts something
that is offensive
language, racist, sexist?
AMY HARTJEN: Absolutely.
LISA STARK: Really?
And why would that
be a red line?
AMY HARTJEN: Because that
is just -- it's against
the campus culture.
LISA STARK: Students threatening
to harm others or themselves
sometimes telegraph that on
social media, and districts
have been sued for not paying
attention to online posts.
These days, the schoolyard
has new boundaries.
ZACHERY FOUNTAIN, Dysart
District Communications
Chief: The information
space is just as important
as the physical space anymore,
because it has that ability
to snowball at a really rapid
pace.
LISA STARK: Zachery
Fountain is the Dysart
District Communications
Chief, and point man
on social media.
He trains staff on how to
document troublesome posts.
ZACHERY FOUNTAIN: That's
teaching them things like asking
for a screen shot of what has
happened, understanding that
a message could disappear in
five seconds, as soon as it's
brought to their
attention by a student.
LISA STARK: Nationwide,
both public and private
schools keep tabs on
social media in a variety
of ways: hiring firms
to actively monitor
students' accounts,
encouraging students to
report anything worrisome,
friending students to
gain access to posts
that may not be public,
and through simple alerts
every time the district
and its schools are
mentioned in any type
of media.
There's anecdotal evidence, but
no hard data, to show that early
identification of troubling
social media posts can help
schools head off problems.
School officials here
insist they are most
concerned about safety.
They're not trying to
pry into students' lives.
But civil rights and privacy
groups say it can be a slippery
slope and that some districts
have gone too far, that
they have violated students'
constitutional rights.
Students have been disciplined
for liking other posts, for
private online chats that
others made public, for
forwarding racist posts, even
in order to denounce them.
CHAD MARLOW, American Civil
Liberties Union: Schools need
to think about, how do we take
on these issues in an
appropriate way that
doesn't have kind of
the collateral damage
effect of destroying students'
privacy and free speech rights?
LISA STARK: Chad Marlow
is with the American
Civil Liberties Union.
He says, first and foremost,
school shouldn't have open-ended
access to students' social
media accounts.
You're saying no
fishing expeditions?
CHAD MARLOW: No
fishing expeditions.
And the way to do that is
by not allowing passwords to
be turned over, what we call
shoulder surfing.
Log onto your account, and the
teacher will stand over the
student's shoulder and say,
scroll, scroll, scroll.
LISA STARK: Are you asking
students for passwords?
WENDY KLARKOWSKI, School
Resource Officer: No.
LISA STARK: Or log-in
information or anything?
WENDY KLARKOWSKI: No.
LISA STARK: School resource
officer Wendy Klarkowski is
assigned to Shadow Ridge High
School in the Dysart district.
Her morning routine includes
searching for school-related
posts on social media.
She's uncovered
criminal activity.
WENDY KLARKOWSKI: A young
man had decided to bring some
marijuana-laced brownies to
school, and he advertised
them on Twitter and,
meet me in the cafeteria.
We got him with all the
brownies still on him.
LISA STARK: And possible
campus disruptions.
WENDY KLARKOWSKI: Some kids
were going to protest something
they thought was unfair,
and it was all over Twitter,
so we were able to get the kids
that were leading it, actually,
the night before, so that
they put an end to that, so
it didn't disrupt the campus.
LISA STARK: But why isn't
that their free speech right
to protest something they're
not happy about?
WENDY KLARKOWSKI: It is
their right to protest,
but it is not their right
to disturb an educational
institution.
LISA STARK: The ACLU's Marlow
worries about districts
stifling free speech.
CHAD MARLOW: It is very
important to draw the line
between punishing an action that
occurs on social media
vs. thoughts that are
expressed on social media.
Once you start policing and
punishing thoughts, you are into
very, very dangerous territory.
LISA STARK: Two of the Dysart
students we spoke with say they
tread more carefully online
after each posted a
disparaging remark about
one of their teachers.
STUDENT: I made a reference to
one of my teachers last year
on Facebook, and I almost got a
referral for it, for
what I said about her.
And then me and the teacher
ended up talking, and now
she's my favorite teacher ever.
HADIN KHAN, Student:
It was funny at first.
Then I was like, OK, I need
to take some precautions
for next time, when I'm
angry about something,
not mention names or anything.
I could say English teacher, as
opposed to saying their name.
LISA STARK: So, you
are censoring yourself
in a way, right?
HADIN KHAN: Yes, kind of.
Yes.
LISA STARK: How do you feel
about having to do that?
HADIN KHAN: I don't really
have a problem with it, because
it's not that serious of
an issue.
LISA STARK: Superintendent Gail
Pletnick insists the district
is careful not to violate free
speech or privacy rights.
GAIL PLETNICK, Superintendent,
Dysart Unified School District:
We're not crossing that line.
We're not monitoring
people 24/7.
We're not the
social media police.
But we are concerned about
anything that we feel will
be harmful to our students.
LISA STARK: Pletnick says
technology changes so quickly
that schools can find themselves
operating in a gray area.
GAIL PLETNICK: Those laws,
those rules, those guidelines
that we're going to have to use
are being developed.
So, we're really not only flying
this plane while we build it,
while it's being designed.
LISA STARK: It can be
a rough ride, so Dysart
and other districts are
increasingly starting
to teach digital
citizenship, the responsible
use of technology, to
impress upon students
to think before they click.
STUDENT: I like that.
That's cute.
LISA STARK: For the "PBS
NewsHour" and Education
Week, I'm Lisa Stark
in Surprise, Arizona.